
blow a bag
4 x intro (no beat, no bass)

4 x chorus (beat + bass)
4 x chorus (add high)

4 x verse same (snare fill)
4 x verse + high 
4 x verse same (hat+snare drop on last 4 beats)

4 x chorus
4 x chorus (high mirrors bass)

4 x verse same (snare fill)
4 x verse same
4 x verse (full beat drops out on last 8 beats)

4 x chorus
4 x chorus

4 x outro (same as intro)

slave master
4 x strings intro (no beat)
8 x strings + kick + bass

4 x verse (add in hat, snare and high) (do it for ni who gone)
4 x verse add distorted guitar (pinky ring)
2 x verse (hat and snare drops out for all 4)

4 x chorus still hat and snare dropped out
4 x chorus muted (with hat and snare)

verse

on next chorus + outro, hat is on eighth notes

thought it was a drought
8 x intro with no beat (but with bass)
4 x chorus (hat on 8th notes, kick, clap, and snare)
4 x chorus (add harmony) same beat

4 x verse (hat gets fancy)
4 x verse same (B)
4 x verse (add harmony)
4 x verse same

4 x chorus (beat drops out fully, bass stays, cuts out for last 4)
4 x chorus beat back in

4 x verse (add high) same beat w fancy hat (cuts out for last 4)
4 x verse fancy kick before end
4 x verse (then i put one in the air)

1 x chorus no beat
3 x chorus with beat

4 x chorus with high

4 x chorus/outro


2 bitches




Song structure for a traditional beatgen song. This is the secret sauce of beatgen.
Copyright 2018, Kyle Dhillon.

“Beatpart”
Core unit of a song. A song consists of a series of beatparts in different orders, and with different effects applied to them. For trap songs, beatparts are usually 8 beats in length (2 measures or bars). They repeat after 8 beats.

Beatpart components:
Melody (piano, strings, synth, flute etc). Most complex unit of the song.
Optional: Harmony (like melody, can be same instrument or different).
Bass (aka 808, subbass).
Drums (aka kit):
Closed hi-hat (aka hat)
Kick
Snare
Optional: open hi-hat
Optional: clap (similar to snare, but lighter sound)

Beatpart effects:
If you just have one or two beatparts repeating with all components playing, the song sounds boring! The way you create a good song is with “negative space.” You build and resolve tension by removing various components of the beat at the right time. 

Muting can be applied to beatparts at various times to increase tension:
Mute one or more parts of drums (common)
Mute harmony (common)
Mute bass (common)
Mute melody (uncommon)
The rules of when to mute these various parts are explained in “Song” below.

You can also mute parts of the beat for only a subsection of a beatpart. This builds tension before or after a key “drop” in the song:
Mute drums completely at end of beatpart (last 2-4 beats) (very common)
Mute bass at the end of a beatpart (very common)
Mute melody (uncommon)
Mute harmony (uncommon)

There may be other effects (fade in/fade out, filter, snare roll, 808 roll - Slime Shit) that can be applied to beatparts (but which I haven’t added yet).


“Song”
A song will usually need only 1 or 2 core beatparts. Beatparts in the same song will always be related (similar melody, similar key). For example, a song will have beatpart A and beatpart B. Here’s a few common patterns for a single “sixteen” (verse or chorus)
A B A B   A B A B
A A B B   A A B B
A A A A   B B B B 
A A A A   A A A A

Song properties:
Key (C, D minor, etc). 24 possible keys. Trap songs are usually minor key. This determines tones of melody/harmony.
Tempo (common is 120-150 BPM)
Intro length (usually 1, 2, or 4 beatparts)
Song effects (see below)

Song structure:
This involves placement of beatparts, as well as which effects should be applied to beatparts. 
Let’s do “X” by future + 21 savage. This song is fairly simple
E.g.:
Intro (mute drums + harmony on all)
A A
Chorus (mute harmony on all): 
A A B B (mute drums at end of last B)
Verse:
A A B B (mute harmony on first 4) A A B B (mute drums and bass for all of last B)
Chorus:
A A B B (mute everything on first 4) 



Other song effects:
Accent sound effects, played at beginning of a 16 (on the drop)
Tubular bell sound (Hannah Montana)
Kill Bill siren 
Fade out at end of song
Fade in at end of song
“Hey!” sound on off beats
Lex Luger key change 
Lex Luger synth build up before drop 
